The Iliad or The Poem of Force SIMONE WElL The ILIAD or The Poem of Force PENDLE HILL � Wallingford Pennsylvania First edition December 1956, 5000 copies Reprinted October 1959, 3000 copies T hird Reprinting November 1964, 3000 copies Fourth Reprinting Fifth Reprinting Sixth Reprinting Seventh Reprinting Eighth Reprinting July 1967, 3000 copies January 1970, 2000 copies November 1971, 1500 copies June 1973, I ,500 copies April 1976, 3,000 copies August 1978, 2,000 copies January 1981, 2000 copies N inth Reprinting Tenth Reprinting Eleventh Reprinting October 1983, 5,000 copies Twelfth Reprinting April 1991, 3,500 copies in the summer It may thus be read event, which signal­ It was originally of the most extreme published, in the December literary The Iliad, or The Poem of Force was written and fall of 1940, after the fall of France. as in indirect on that tragic commentary ized the triumph force. donym "Emile Navis," 1941 issues The present from Homer wei:e first translated by Miss McCarthy and then checked Macdonald appeared issued of the Marseilles translation monthly, is by Mary McCarthy. in accordance in the November in pamphlet form. modern expression of pseu­ under the acrostical 1940 and January Cahiers du Sud. The quotations from the French manuscript and revised with the Greek text. "The Iliad" 1945 issue of Politics and was later by Dwight Pendle Hill is grateful sion to reprint essay. to Dwight Macdonald for his permis­ of Simone Weil's the Politics pamphlet edition OUR COVER: Achilles Killing Troilos. a red figured cup made by Euphronios and painted by Onesimos, Attic craftsmen of the early 5th century. Discov­ ered at Vulci in Etruria, this work is now in the Perugia Museum. (Drawing from Edmond Pottier's Douris fig. 18. facing p. 64.) of Greek Vases. and the Painters Books by Simone Weil: The Need for Roots, Gravity and Grace, Waiting for God and The Notebooks of Simone Weil, (G. P. Putnam, New York); Intimations among the Ancient Greeks (Beacon, Boston) of Christianity THE true hero, the true subject, the center of the by with force, away. In this as deformed it could handle, the human spirit who considered thanks to progress, to. For those dreamers as swept away, blinded, by man, force that enslaves is shown as modified by the very by the weight Iliad is force. Force employed man, force before which man's flesh shrinks work, at all times, its relations force it imagined of the force it submits that force, past, the 1/iad could appear as an historical document; others, perceive man history, the 1/iad is the purest would soon be a thing of the for are more acute and who at the very center of hu­ of mirrors. and the loveliest who is sub­ it turns man it makes a corpse out was here, and the next minute there is to it into a thing. Exercised sense: jected into a thing in the most literal of him. Somebody nobody here at all; this us: of showing whose powers of recognition is that x that turns anybody today as yesterday, the 1/iad never wearies To define force-it to the limit, is a spectacle force, . . . the horses Rattled the empty chariots Longing for their noble drivers. Lay, dearer to the vultures through the files of battle, But they on the ground than to their wives. The hero becomes dust: a thing dragged behind a chariot in the All around, his black hair in the dust his whole head lay, Was spread; That once-charming Defile it on his native soil. head; now Zeus had let his enemies 3 The bitterness undiluted. prospect out halo of patriotism No comforting of immortality; descends. of such a spectacle is offered us absolutely fiction intervenes; no consoling and on the hero's head no washed­ His soul, fleeing his limbs, passed to Hades, Mourning its fate, forsaking its youth and its vigor. painful is the contrast-is more poignant-so Still world: the far­ as quickly evocation, the away, precarious, of the family, world in which each man counts more than anything else to those about him. rubbed out, of another world of peace, touching the sudden maids in the palace She ordered her bright-haired To place on the fire a large tripod, A hot bath for Hector, returning Foolish Slain by grey-eyed woman! Already he lay, far from hot baths, arm. Athena, who guided Achilles' preparing from battle. Far from hot baths he was indeed, alone. Nearly all the lliad takes place Nearly all of human life, hot baths. then and now, takes place far from poor man. And not he far from hot baths. Here we see force in its grossest and most summary form­ in its processes, i.e., kill, it will possibly and ready, How much more varied in its effects the is the other force, that does not kill just yet. It will kill, or perhaps the force that kills. how much more surprising force that does not kill, surely poised any moment, which is to say at every moment. In whatever its effect is the same: it turns a man into a stone. aspect, From its first property to turn a human being into a thing by the simple method of killing quite prodigious human being into a thing while he is still too in its own way, the ability to turn a he it merely hangs, it can kill, over the head of the creature him) flows another, (the ability He is alive; alive. at 4 entity house it finds itself this An extraordinary has a soul; and yet-he is a thing. -a thing that has a soul. And as for the soul, what an extra­ ordinary in! Who can say what it costs it, moment by moment, how much writhing required does so, under pressure ment of its nature A man stands to this residence, are and pleating a thing; if it there is not a single ele­ is not done. to accommodate and bending, of it? It was not made to live inside and naked with a weapon pointing itself folding of necessity, to which violence disarmed at him; this person becomes thing touches hoping: or any­ acting, him. Just a minute ago, he was thinking, a corpse before anybody he pondered. And the other drew near, anxious to touch his knees, hoping in his heart Motionless, Terrified, To escape evil death and black destiny With one hand he clasped, While the other clung to the sharp spear, not letting suppliant, his knees, . .. go . . . Soon, however, pointing he is simply matter; he grasps the fact that the weapon which is at him will not be diverted; and now, still breathing, still thinking, he can think no longer: son of Priam Thus spoke the brilliant In begging words. But he heard a harsh reply: He spoke. And the other's Dropping Achilles, Through the neck and breastbone. Sunk home its full length. Lay still, The other, face down, and the black blood ran out, wetting his spear, he knelt down, holding drawing his sharp sword, struck knees and heart failed him. The two-edged sword out his arms. the ground. 5 IF a stranger, throws himself completely disabled, on the mercy of a warrior, disarmed, on the warrior's In any case, his flesh has lost that very important distinguishes If you give a frog's he is to death; but a moment of him of part will suffice to relieve pro­ strengthless, not, by this very act, condemned impatience his life. perty which in the laboratory dead-the response. galvanic electric shock, with the touch or sight of something horrible this bundle of muscles, Alone of all living things, neither As his lips advance most charged things cannot: teeth-they He has lost the right to do so. that is for him of all they do not draw back on his to touch the object with horror, nerves, the suppliant flesh from leg an or terrifying, twitches. we have just described and flesh likewise If you confront nor trembles. it twitches. a human being quivers living No one saw great Priam enter. He stopped, Clasped the knees of Achilles, Those terrible man-killing kissed his hands, hands that had slaughtered so many of his sons. The sight of a human being pushed to such an extreme suffering chills us like the sight of a dead body: of strikes a man, and arrives As when harsh misfortune He has killed The door of a rich man; a shudder seizes So Achilles shuddered The others shuddered to see divine Priam; too, looking one at the other. at last at someone else's see him. those who a man if in his own country door, But this feeling of the suffering lasts only a moment. Soon the very presence creature is forgotten: He spoke. The other, remembering his own father, longed to weep; Taking the old man's arm, he pushed him away. 6 of Hector, Both were remembering. Priam wept, abased at the feet of Achilles. But Achilles Now for Patroclus. wept, now for his father, And their sobs resounded Thinking killer of men, through the house. an inert object. Anybody who his own old father, his knees, move­ of his being with a single modifying as if, clasping words, recalling It was merely a question power over us by his very exercises a certain that is, the to him alone, and a power that belongs each movement repressing, that out. If we step aside for a passer-by on the aside to avoid a bill­ It was not insensibility that made Achilles ment of his hand push away the old man who had been cling­ ing to his knees; Priam's had moved him to tears. as free in his attitudes and movements there were not a suppliant but is in our vicinity presence, power of halting, our body sketches road, it is not the same thing as stepping board; alone in our rooms, we get up, walk about, sit down from the way we do when we have a again quite differently visitor. of by men whom another a moment of impatience fore even thought their presence, people they, on their side, running nothing in a single instant, persons. Pushed, unless chance gives somebody But supposing again. to up, honored take this resurrection seriously; a wish they dare not express lest an irritated on them. In move about as if they were not there; the risk of being reduced nothingness they lie where they are, But this indefinable human being has on us is not exercised imitate they fall. Fallen, that at long last they have been picked do not venture still has a chance to pass sentence to in their own remarks, they the idea of raising that the presence them forever with cordial can deprive voice return influence who can die be­ to silence of life, them up : He spoke; the old man trembled and obeyed. 7 no room in them for any impulse of their own. that their life is harder than other men's nor that they is answered, once his prayer like everybody creatures Their days hold no pastimes, else. But there who have become AT least a suppliant, a human being again, for the rest of their lives. becomes are other, more unfortunate things no free spaces, It is not occupy a lower place in the social human species, another corpse. The idea of a person's tradiction. life, shreds. woman, and never achieving death strung life that death congeals and the contradiction This thing is constantly before Yet what is impossible hierarchy; no, they are a man and a a compromise between being a thing is a logical con­ in logic becomes true in it to lodged within aspiring the soul tears to be a man or a out over a whole lifetime; it-here, surely, here, surely is death but but is life, abolishing. This strange fate awaits the virgin, the priest's daughter: I will not give her up. Sooner shall old age come upon her In our house in Argos, far from her native land, Tending the loom and sharing my bed. It awaits the young wife, the young mother, the prince's bride: And perhaps one day, in Argos, you will weave cloth for another, And the Messeian Much against or Hyperian your will, yielding water you will fetch, to a harsh necessity. It awaits the baby, heir to the royal scepter: Soon they will be carried I with them. And you, my child, will either go with me, To a land where you will work at wretched Laboring off in the hollow ships, for a pitiless master . . . . tasks, In the mother's eyes, such a fate is, for her child, as terrible 8 against would rather the army that subjects die than see his wife re­ of heaven are invoked the husband as death; duced to it; all the plagues father the victims themselves are beyond all this. Curses, reflections comparisons, rebellion, are obliterated itself barely the slave's from the mind of the captive; privilege. on. Fidelity his daughter on the future lingers to his city and his dead is not by the to it. Yet of feelings and the past, and memory of his master, despoiler, And what does it take to make the slave weep? The mis­ of the fortune his oppressor, man who laid waste his town and killed his very eye .... This man suffers or dies; then the slave's come. And really on which tears are permitted, will always cry whenever situation pillager, his dear ones under tears keeps tears on tap for him. why not? This is for him the only occasion are, indeed, required. A slave he can do so with impunity-his She spoke, weeping, Using the pretext and the women groaned, of Patroclus to bewail their own torments. of his life, to express has no license just as, with the horse in harness, it follows him a little, Since the slave to his master, except anything that the only emotion what is pleasing that can touch or enliven that can reach him in the desolation of love for his master. is the emotion There is no place else to send the gift of love; all other outlets are barred, bar every way but one. breast a hope is born, the hope of becoming, through someone once again, won't these captives though these emotions should, considering for them: some day, how far even somebody's influence, And if, by some miracle, are addressed to the very men who reek with horror the very recent bit, shafts, in the slave's go to show love and thankfulness, past, still reins My husband, to whom my father and respected mother gave me, 9 with me, of a single mother, by the sharp bronze. I saw before the city transfixed My three brothers, children, So dear to mel They all met their fatal day. But you did not allow me to weep, when swift Achilles Slaughtered You promised For his legitimate my husband and laid waste the city of Mynes. wife, that he would carry me away in his me that I would be taken by divine Achilles, ships, To Pythia, where our marriage among would be celebrated the Myrmidons, So without respite been gentle. I mourn for you, you who have always To lose more than the slave does is impossible, of it he may get back if he fate, but this is his only of changing his A fragment his whole inner life. sees the possibility hope. Such is the empire of force, of nature. erase the whole inner life, Nature, can too, when vital needs are at stake, even the grief of a mother: as extensive as the empire for he loses But the thought of eating came to her, when she was tired of tears. FORCE, in the hands of another, that extreme hunger does; for it the power of life and death. Its the soul the same tyranny possesses, and in perpetuo, rule, moreover, The man who knows himself weaker alone in the heart of a city than a man lost in the desert. than another is as cold and hard as the rule of inert matter. exercises is more over Two casks are placed before Zeus's doorsill, Containing the other . . . the gifts he gives, the bad in one, the good in 1 0 The man to whom he gives baneful gifts, he exposes to outrage; A frightful He is a wanderer, need drives across the divine earth;· and gets no respect from gods or men. he the first it it. The hu­ Force is as pitiless to the man who possesses it, or thinks The truth is, nobody really possesses up, in the Iliad, into conquered per­ on the one hand, and conquerors suppliants, the second it crushes, does, as it is to its victims; intoxicates. man race is not divided sons, slaves, chiefs who does not at one time or another force. The common soldier right to bear arms; nevertheless of orders and In this poem there is not a single man have to bow his neck to the Iliad is free and has he is subject on the other. and abuse: in the to the indignity he came upon a commoner shouting out, But whenever He struck him with his scepter "Good for nothing! You are weak and cowardly You count for nothing, neither and spoke sharply: Be still and listen to your betters, and unwarlike, in battle nor in council." Thersites he makes, comments those made by Achilles: pays dear for the perfectly reasonable not at all different, comments from moreover, on back and shoulders, He hit him with his scepter So that he doubled over, and a great tear welled up, And a bloody welt appeared Under the golden scepter. Wiping away his tears, bewildered Troubled Frightened, and in pain. on his back he sat down, though they were, the others laughed long at him. himself, is shown that proud hero, the undefeated, Achilles us at the outset woman he wanted for his bride has been helpless taken from under his nose, and he has not dared to oppose it: of the poem, weeping grief-the with humiliation and 1 1 . . . But Achilles Weeping, By the white-capped sat apart from his companions, waves, staring over the boundless ocean. What has happened humiliated Achilles, is that Agamemnon has deliberately to show that he himself is the master: ... So you will learn That I am greater To treat me as an equal and set himself me. against than you, and anyone else will hesitate But a few days pass and now the supreme weeping and have, moreover, is in his turn. He must humble himself, commander he must plead, the added misery of doing it all in vain. In the same way, there is not a single batants who is spared the shameful heroes quake like everybody else. from Hector tion--except happen to be present: It only needs a challenge to throw the whole Greek force into consterna­ for Achilles one of the com­ of fear. The and his men, and they did not experience He spoke and all grew still and held their peace, Ashamed to refuse, afraid to accept. But once Ajax comes forward changes sides: and offers himself, fear quickly A shudder of terror ran through the Trojans, making their limbs weak; And Hector himself felt his heart leap in his breast. But he no longer had the right to tremble, or to run away . .. . Two days later, it is Ajax's turn to be terrified: Zeus the father on high, makes fear rise in Ajax. He stops, overcome, puts behind him his buckler made of seven hides, Trembles, looks at the crowd around, like a wild beast . . . . 1 2 Even to Achilles stammer him, not a man. But, with the exception in the /laid tastes a matter of valor than of blind destiny, in the poem by Zeus's the moment comes; he too must shake and with fear, though it is a river that has this effect on every man in battle. Victory which is symbolized a moment of defeat golden scales: of Achilles, is less Then Zeus the father took his golden scales, In them he put the two fates of death that cuts down all men, One for the Trojans, tamers of horses, one for the Greeks. bronze-sheathed He seized the scales by the middle; it was the fatal day of Greece that sank. destiny By its very blindness, Blind also is she who decrees He that takes the sword, will perish formulated almost the same terms: the principle establishes a kind of justice. to warriors punishment in kind. by the sword. The Iliad long before the Gospels did, and in Ares is just, and kills those who kill. PERHAPS all men, by the very act of being born, that they are, as a matter yet this is a truth to which cir­ shuts men's eyes. The strong to suffer violence; strong, is aware of this. of fact, nor are the weak absolutely weak, They have in common a refusal to are destined cumstance never absolutely but neither believe see no relation versa. through a non-resistant element; surrounds him nothing has the impulse the weak and vice of force seems to walk that between the power to interpose, both belong to the same species: and the strong, themselves The man who is the possessor and the act, the tiny interval in the human substance between that is reflection. 13 We see his corpse cut the throats for there is none either of their deeds will at length as we cut flowers for a grave. power, have no suspicion we see men in arms behaving or prudence. Hence and madly. We see their sword bury itself to him the outrages of twelve as naturally of the fact that come home to too will bow the neck in their turn. If you can obey, with a single word tremble, of why should it occur to you that the curses in the breast at enemy who is in the very act of pleading over a dying man by will endure. Trojan boys on the funeral Where there is no room for reflection, justice harshly of a disarmed their knees. We see them triumph describing Achilles pyre of Patroclus These men, wielding the consequences them-they make an old man fall silent, of your own, this old man, who is after all a priest, portance taking Achilles' he nor she can do anything over the sight of the Greeks fleeing in misery and confusion. What could possibly last exactly indicates death, of his own? Thus it happens those who have force on loan from fate count on it too much and are destroyed. gods' eyes? Why should you refrain from girl away from him if you know that neither it, that this very rout will be the cause of his friend's as long as he wants it to and end when his mood to him that this rout, which will but obey you? Achilles and, for that matter, will have their own im­ rejoices suggest in the that quantity; nor do they see their But at the time their own destruction seems impossible them. For they do not see that the force in their possession only a limited other human beings as a kind of balance between amounts movements all our consideration clude that destiny none at all to their inferiors. of the force measure of hesitation, wherein they con­ in humanity, to them, and And at this point they exceed the Since other people do not impose on their lies to is with unequal for our brothers has given complete that halt, that interval at their disposal. that is actually relations of force. license In- 14 they exceed it, since they are not aware that it is evitably And now we see them committed to irretrievably limited. suddenly things chance; chance is kind to them, sometimes they are, exposed, power that formerly stands shield, But in any case there gone is the armor of no cease to obey them. Sometimes open to misfortune; their naked souls; them and tears. protected nothing, between cruel. to penalize to Socrates it functions which was the of Greek thought. automatically as the mainspring This retribution, it was the jumping-off To the Pythagoreans, we find the idea of it familiar. which has a geometrical rigor, the abuse of force, It is the soul of the epic. Under of and upon the point of speculation has coun­ In Oriental operates main subject the name of Nemesis, Aeschylus's tragedies. Plato, nature of man and the universe. Wherever Hellenism penetrated, tries which are steeped idea that bas lived on under the name of Kharma. The Occi­ dent, however, express ure, equilibrium, life are, in the West, restricted vocabulary of technics. the Greeks were, first of all, geometricians ship to virtue. has lost it, and no longer even has a word to of limit, meas­ the conduct of in the function of matter; We are only geometricians it in any of its languages: which ought to determine in their apprentice­ conceptions in Buddhism, to a servile it is perhaps this Greek THE progress game of seesaw. invincible, a continual himself experienced may have thing. transitory scribed even though, defeat; he forgets At the end of the first day of combat de­ to treat victory as a in the Iliad, the victorious Greeks were in a position of the war in the Iliad is simply of the moment feels only a few hours before, The victor he 15 of all their efforts, to obtain the object riches-assuming had reason to believe Egyptian priests, to Herodotus the Greeks are no longer of course as Homer did, that the Greeks that Helen was in Troy. Actually, the who ought to have known, affirmed later on that she was in Egypt. In any case, that evening interested i.e., Helen and her in her or her possessions: let us not accept the riches of Paris; "For the present, Nor Helen; everybody That Troy stands on the verge of ruin." him. He spoke, and all the Achaeans acclaimed sees, even the most ignorant, of Troy; for their bonfires, for slaves, What they want is, in fact, everything. For booty, all the riches houses; all the men. They forget that everything is not within their power, for they are not in Troy. Perhaps perhaps will be there tomorrow; makes the same mistake: all the women and children; they the same day, all the palaces, not. Hector, one detail, temples, for corpses, and in my hearts, For I know well in my entrails A day will come when Holy Troy will perish, And Priam, and the nation of. Priam of the good lance. But I think less of the grief that is in store for the Trojans, And of Hecuba herself, And of my brothers, Who will fall in the dust under the blows of the enemy, Than of you that day when a Greek in his bronze breastplate Will drag you away weeping and deprive and of Priam the king, so numerous and so brave, you of your liberty. But as for me, may I be dead, and may the earth have covered me Before I hear you cry out or see you dragged away! At this moment what would he not give to turn aside those But at this moment to be inevitable? which he believes horrors 1 6 he could give would be of any use. The next day but nothing one, however, Agamemnon himself And now Hector, readily unwilling secure the enemy's the Greeks have run away miserably, to the sea again. is in favor of putting and by making a very few concessions, could to let them go empty-handed: departure; yet now he is even and let the brightness Greeks, sail over the broad back of ocean ... Set fires everywhere Lest in the night the long-haired Escaping, Let each of them take home a wound to heal ... thus others will fear To bring dolorous war to the Trojans, mount the skies tamers of horses. His wish is granted; reduce Hector the Greeks stay; and the next day they and his men to a pitiable condition: As for them-they fled across the plain like cattle Whom a lion hunts before him in the dark midnight Thus the mighty Agamemnon, Steadily son of Atreus, and still they fled. the hindmost; killing . . . pursued them, Hector regains In the course of the afternoon, again, by Patroclus, ancy, withdraws repulsed Patroclus, exposed, And finally that evening counsel prudent pressing wounded and without then puts the Greeks to flight, who has come in with his fresh troops. ends by finding himself armor, to the sword of Hector. his advantage, of Polydamas and repudiates it sharply: the victorious Hector hears the the ascend­ then is Now that wily Kronos's Glory at the ships; now that I have driven the Greeks to son has given me the sea, Do not offer, fool, such counsels No Trojan will listen So Hector spoke, and the Trojans acclaimed to you,· nor would I permit it . . . to the people. him .. . 17 has harried him across of the two in combat; The next day Hector is lost. Achilles the field and is abot!t to kill him. stronger after several against the walls of Troy, absolutely and to steady an exhausted his soul to face it: enemy? And Hector stands alone, weeks of rest, ardent for vengeance been the He has always how much the more so now, alone to wait for death and victory, before alone, at once would heap dishonor through my recklessness Alas, were I to slip through the gate, behind the rampart, Polydamas And now that my people, I fear the Trojans I fear to hear from some one far less brave than 1: "Hector, on me ... I have destroyed and the long-robed too far, has ruined his his own strength Trojan women, trusting people." ... my spear against the wall, and, leaning Suppose I were to down my bossed shield, My massive helmet, Should go to meet renowned Achilles? But why spin out these fancies? I would not reach him, nor would he pity me, me. He would kill me like a woman Or respect If I came naked thus ... ... Why such dreams? Not a jot of the grief and ignominy Alone, stripped is Hector spared. discovers shelter that fall to the unfortunate of the prestige that kept him from taking to the of the walls is not enough to save him from flight: that the courage of force, he Seeing him, Hector began to tremble. To stay ... . . . It i s not for a ewe nor the skin of an ox, That they are striving, not these ordinary rewards of the He had not the heart race,· It is for a life horses. that they run, the life of Hector, tamer of 1 8 Wounded to death, vain supplications: he enhances by his conqueror's triumph I implore you, by your soul, by your knees, .... by your parents of the Iliad knew that the death of Hector But the auditors would be but a brief joy to Achilles, but a brief joy to the Trojans, a brief joy to the Achaeans. and the death of Achilles of Troy but and the destruction THUS violence It comes to seem just as external as to And from this springs the idea of a destiny obliterates anybody who feels its to its employer touch. its victim. which executioner which conquered distress. and vice versa: The conquered and victim stand and conqueror brings equally innocent, in the same are brothers misfortune to the conqueror, before before A single son, short-lived, Neglected I camp before Troy, injuring by me, he grows old-for far from home you and your sons. was born to him. which alone would enable man in its machinery, would require which is as rare as dignity in weakness. is not without since of at least three quarters its perils, upon that marvelous indifference virtue, A moderate moderation use of force, to escape being enmeshed superhuman Moreover, prestige, its strength, that the strong tagious that it infects excess it. Yet ordinarily itself from which force derives rests principally feel toward the weak, an indifference the very people who are the objects prudence so con­ of or is not arrived at through 19 On the contrary, considerations. temptation. politic to an irresistible ally heard in the mouths of the characters sites' are reasonable speeches of the angry Achilles: to the highest speeches in the Iliad. Ther­ degree; so are the man dashes to it as The voice of reason is occasion­ Nothing is worth my life, not all the goods They say the well-built A man can capture But, once gone, the soul cannot be captured steers and fatted sheep city of Ilium contains. back. he is punished But words of reason drop into the void. If they come from and shuts up; if from a chief, his else, there is everything In the betray them. And failing an inferior, actions always a god handy to advise end, the very idea of wanting lotted from the mind: one-the business him to be unreasonable. to escape the role fate has al­ of killing and dying-disappears We to whom Zeus Has assigned Suffering suffering, from youth to old age, in grievous wars, till we perish to the last man. Already themselves to be "condemned men." these warriors, like Craonne's so much later, felt IT was the simplest At the outset, trap that pitched at the embarkation, always are if you have a large force on but space to oppose you. Their weap­ this situation. are light, as hearts your side and nothing ons are in their hands; the enemy is absent. has been conquered Unless your spirit of the en- by the reputation them into their hearts in advance 20 emy, you always feel yourself body who is not there. yoke of necessity. sity yet presents a game, as though on holiday life. itself; To the spirits to be much stronger than any­ An absent man does not impose the of those embarking no neces­ consequently they go off as though to from the confinement of daily Where have they gone, those braggadocio We proudly flung upon the air at Lemnos, Stuffing ourselves Drinking As for Trojans-a Could handle in battle. from cups brimming over with wine? hundred or two each man of us with flesh of horned steers, boasts And now one is too much for us. of war does not immediately destroy will not submit to it so long in long days empty of necessity, war is a game. War's necessity in kind from the necessity of peace. So ter­ is terrible, al­ escape; But the first contact the illusion that together different rible is it that the human spirit as it can possibly refuge days arbitrary tion; the lives you destroy quite as incapable ture and smirched true if a momentary divine and basely, coarsely hand that wards off defeat and unreal. loved. But with the majority and whenever it can escape it takes days of play, of revery, an abstrac­ and are like toys broken by a child, ges­ Danger then becomes of feeling; heroism with boastfulness. of vitality access is but a theatrical This becomes doubly comes to reinforce and death. the Then war is easy of the combatants this state of mind comrades in the hand of necessity. Soon there comes a day when fear, or defeat, spirit, does not persist. or the death of beloved and it crumbles is no more a game or a dream; now at last the warrior doubt the reality which he And this reality, perceives, death. Once you acknowledge is hard, much too hard to be borne, for it enfolds death to be a practical of its existence. the warrior's At that moment war touches cannot pos- 21 travel between the future is different yet for those whose the experience death is the future, may grow old in battles; face. The mind is then strung for assigns and days piled on days make years. the thought True enough, have bent under the yoke of war, the relation than for as a limit set in advance except in of it becomes unendurable, all men are fated to die; true enough other men. For other on the future; his profession is abhor­ of war makes visible the of death that lies locked up in each moment, our from one day to the next without meet­ up to a pitch it can sibility, flashes. also, a soldier spirits death and the future men death appears the soldier him. Yet the idea of man's having death for a future rent to nature. Once possibility thoughts cannot ing death's stand for only a short time; but each new dawn reintroduces the same necessity; On Regularly, each one of these days the soul suffers violence. for every morning, meeting death thought or of purpose on the way. Thus war effaces all conceptions even its own "war aims." It effaces the very goal, including a situ­ notion to be inside ation so violent its end. Consequently, nobody it is to be unable to conceive to bring this end about. In the presence of an does anything armed enemy, what hand can relinquish its weapon? The mind ought to find a way out, but the mind has lost all capa­ city to so much as look outward. sorbed in doing itself violence. war or slavery as it were, by the force of their own specific look to the outsider they continue because resources sufferings and so gravity, to bear; actually, as though they were easy of the the sufferer whether continue, is in question, intolerable they have deprived which might serve to extricate the soul castrates through as this is to find it inconceivable; itself time without The mind is completely ab­ to an end. To be outside of war's being brought Always in human life, of aspiration, cannot journey Nevertheless, him. to war cries out for the soul that is enslaved to it in an extreme appears itself but deliverance deliverance, 22 aspect, the aspect of destruction. more reasonable and tragic tion, more moderate, expose the mind to suffering not be borne, even as memory. Terror, slaughter, these things toxication idea that an unlimited profit or no profit at all is terribly should not continually of force had not intervened so naked, so violent grief, of comrades-is the annihilation Any other solu­ in character, would that it could exhaustion, that it credible tear at the soul, if the in­ to drown them? The effort should bring in only a limited painful. What? Will we let Priam and the Trojans boast Of Argive Helen, she for whom so many Greeks Died before Troy, far from their native land? What? Do you want us to leave the city, wide-streeted Troy, Standing, when we have suffered so much for it? Troy and Helen are in reality what is Helen to Ulysses? that will not compensate What indeed is Troy, ruin? him for Ithaca's But actually full of riches For the Greeks, of blood and tears; ories. itself can imagine the death of dearly emulation, If the existence the thing nature is the destruction loved comrades in death: a rivalry to master them is to master frightful of an enemy has made a soul destroy put there, then the only remedy the soul of the enemy. At the same time in arouses a spirit of somber mere sources mem­ my dead friend, May I die, then, at once! Since fate has not let me Protect Perished, So now I go to seek the murderer Hector. Zeus wills it-Zeus and the other immortal. And death shall I find at the moment who far from home of my friend, longing for me to defend him from death. It is the same despair one hand, and slaughter that drives on the other: him on toward death, on the 23 I know it well, my fate is to perish here, Far from father and dearly loved mother; but meanwhile I shall not stop till the Trojans have had their fill of war. The man possessed long as he has not become something race from the race of the living. ferent by this twofold need for death belongs, so to a dif­ different, still What echo can the timid hopes of life strike sight How can it hear the defeated begging life has already by a single, heart? been re­ of the light of day? The threatened simple dis­ of nearly all its consequence lieved a weapon. its adversary tinction: Furthermore, how can a man who has rooted out of himself the notion that the light of day is sweet to the eyes respect such a notion when it makes its appearance humble lament? it is now unarmed; in some futile possesses and in such a for another I clasp tight your knees, Achilles. Have a thought, have pity for me. to be respected. bread, vineyard you caught me I stand here, 0 son of Zeus, a suppliant, In your house it was I first tasted Demeter's That day in my well-pruned And sold me, sending me far from father and friends, To holy Lemnos; a hundred oxen was my price. And now I will pay you three hundred for ransom. This dawn is for me my twelfth After so many sorrows. Through some evil fate. Zeus surely must hate me Who again puts me into your hands. Alas, my poor day in Troy, See me here, in your hands, mother, Laothoe, Daughter son you of the old man, Altes-a short-lived have borne. What a reception this feeble hope gets! 24 you too must die. Why make a fuss about it? he too has died-a far better man than you are. Come, friend, Patroclus, Don't you see how handsome I am, how mighty? A noble father begat me, and I have a goddess for mother. Yet even I, like you, must some day encounter Whether the hour strikes at noon, or evening, The hour that comes when some arms-bearing my fate, or sunrise, warrior will kill me. else when you have had to cas­ of all yearning for it demands a truly heart­ of the powers of generosity. It is impossible being capable of such an who dwells, of the poem-! mean Patroclus, in a peculiar who exertion warriors any of Homer's life in somebody it is that warrior To respect trate yourself breaking to imagine unless exertion, way, at the very center "knew hew to be sweet to everybody," the Iliad commits men do we know, in several who would have displayed three?�ven soldier conquering war, he, like of doing so is different--over as over matter itself. ence its inevitable thousand such god-like Lacking is like a scourge becomes this is doubtful. no cruel or brutal the slave, effects: a thing, of nature. Possessed though his manner are as powerless him too, words And both, at the touch of force, experi­ they become deaf and dumb. and who throughout act. But then how many years of human history, generosity? this generosity, Two or the by SucH is the nature of force. Its power of con­ a man into a thing is a double one, and in its applica­ verting tion double-edged. fashions, to stone. those who use it and those who endure it are turned This property of force achieves its maximum eflec- To the same degree, though in different 25 the man either of these fac­ when the tide of by men deprived and everything to the level of inert matter, or to the level of blind force, a transformation, who wins or loses a battle; on the resolution taken, are fought and decided men who have undergone during the clash of arms, in battle, toward a deci­ is rushing man, the man of strategy, tiveness the day has turned, sion. It is not the planning acting battles ulties, dropped sivity, Herein lies the last secret in its similes, wind, wild beasts, or else to frightened animals, in nature that is set into motion by the violence forces. times even from one hour to the next, experience, turn about, one or the other of these transmutations: by the Iliad to fire, flood, which liken the warriors from one day to the next, some­ turn and which is pure pas­ which is pure momentum. sand, to anything of external or God knows what blind cause of disaster, revealed either Greeks and Trojans, of war, a secret who have water, trees, As when a lion, murderous, Which by thousands among the cattle are grazing over some vast marshy springs field. . . . And their flanks heave with terror; Scattered father. in panic before Hector and Zeus, the great even so the Achaians fire breaks out deep in a bushy wood As when a ravening And the wheeling And trees, So Atreus' son, Agamemnon, roared through the ranks Of the Trojans in flight . . . . sparks far and wide, root and branch, topple over in flames,· wind scatters and its equipment, The art of war is simply the art of producing mations, it inflicts on the enemy, are only means directed end-its mations true object are always a mystery; is the warrior's such transfor­ even the casualties toward this the gods are their authors, soul. Yet these transfor­ its processes, the 26 men's imagination. gods who kindle petrifactive quality its nature; will not escape this except by a miracle. rare and of brief duration. two-fold and a soul which has entered this caused, to of force the province are Such miracles But however always, of force, is essential moments, scattered celestial of uniform of the soldier of the conqueror to be so, the despair slaughter-all the poem, those brief, the obliteration in the Iliad to make a picture THE wantonness for any creature these elements of horror, would desolation that knows no or thing that is at its mercy or is him that drives of the slave or the con­ respect imagined on to destruction, quered man, the wholesale combine which force is the sole hero. A monotonous result were it not for those few luminous here and there throughout moments in which man possesses awakes then, to live for an instant once in force's tains no ambiguities, room for anything the course meets it, like Hector before Troy, as he tries to face destiny on his own terms, without times, -and there is hardly ity of which the Iliad does not treat. several pitality the blindness awakes pure and whole; it con­ it has no and love. Sometimes it is in that a man finds his soul: he any form of pure love known to human­ The tradition generations, the help of gods or men. At other their souls but courage of inner deliberations his soul. The soul that only and be lost almost at it is in a moment of love that men discover nothing complicated vast kingdom, even through persists, or turbid; of combat. to dispel of hos­ 27 Thus I am for you a beloved Let us turn our lances away from each other, even in battle. guest in the breast of Argos . .. The love of the son for the parents, mother for son, is continually described, touching for son, of in a manner as as it is curt: of father Thetis answered, "You were born to me for a short life, my child, as you shedding tears, say . .. " love: Even brotherly My three brothers So dear . . . . whom the same mother bore for me, is of an astonishing to sorrow, Imaging the humiliations wife, the husband love, condemned Conjugal purity. beloved even in anticipation could be simpler man about to die? passes which over the one indignity What than the words spoken by his wife to the would stain their tenderness. of slavery which await a Better for me . . . Losing you, to go under the earth. No other comfort Will remain, when you have encountered your death-heavy fate, Only grief, only sorrow . .. . Not less touching are the words expressed to a dead husband: and left me your widow Our child is still tiny, you died young, Dear husband, Alone in the palace. The child you and I, crossed I think he will never grow up . . . For not in your bed did you die, holding And speaking Night and day, as I weep, might live in my memory. to me prudent words which forever by fate, had together. my hand 28 The most beautiful comrades-at-arms, friendship is the final theme of The Epic: of all, the friendship between . . . But Achilles Wept, dreaming of the beloved comrade; sleep, all­ prevailing, Would not take him; he turned over again and again. of love, the crowning grace of war, is triumph that floods the hearts son or a murdered But the purest the friendship it a murdered for vengeance. tance between vanquished, shrinks to nothing: Before it--even more miraculous-the benefactor and suppliant, no longer cries out dis­ and victor between of mortal enemies. Before friend and hunger had been appeased, Priam fell to admiring But when thirst Then Dardanian How tall he was, and handsome; And in his turn Dardanian Who watched his handsome face and listened And when they were satisfied he had the face of a god; Priam was admired by Achilles, of each with contemplation Achilles. to his words. other . . . These moments of grace are rare in the Iliad, but they are enough to make us feel with sharp regret what it is that vio­ lence has killed and will kill again. HowEVER, such a heaping-up deeds were it not for the note of incur­ of violent effect, would have a frigid able bitterness often only a single of the verse, stroke is absolutely that continually makes itself word marks its presence, heard, though often a mere or a run-on line. It is in this that the Iliad from that proceeds in this bitterness unique, 29 and love, which have hardly any place in this study bathe acts of violence, and of unjust nevertheless Never does the tone lose its coloring over the whole human race, im­ of drop into lamentation. as sunlight. and that spreads yet never does the bitterness except as a kind of accent. tenderness partial bitterness; Justice of extremes the work in their light without themselves, scorned, whether is laid bare without happiness man is set above or below the condition whatever are brought seen as counterparts there is any difference, possibly is destroyed equally is regretted. more sharply felt. ever becoming Nothing or not death is its destiny; noticeable precious is un­ everyone's no or disdain; dissimulation common to all men; Victors and vanquished near us; under the same head, both are as well. If of the poet, and the listener are misfortunes it is that the enemy's So he fell there, put to sleep in the sleep of bronze, Unhappy man, far from his wife, defending his own people . .. . And what accents sold at echo the fate of the lad Achilles Lemnos! Eleven days he rejoiced his heart among those he loved, Returning God delivered To him who had to send him, unwilling, him into the hands of Achilles, to Hades. from Lemnos; the twelfth day, once more, And the fate of Euphorbus, who saw only a single day of war. Blood soaked his hair, the hair like to the Graces' When Hector is lamented: . . . guardian of chaste wives and little children. In these few words, chastity appears, dirtied and by force, 30 delivered childhood, of Troy becomes runs by, seeking to elude his doom: an object to the sword. The fountain nostalgia at the gates when Hector of poignant Close by there stood the great stone tanks, Handsomely Were washed clean by Troy's lovely daughters built, where silk-gleaming and garments housewives In the old days of peace, long ago, when the Greeks had not come. Past these did they run their race, pursued and pursuer. The whole of the Iliad lies under the shadow of the greatest calamity of the human race can experience-the destruction a city. This calamity poet been born in Troy. But the tone is not different far from home. Achaeans Insofar could not tear more at the heart had the when the are dying, as this other life, seems calm the life of the living, of the world of peace are felt as the brief evocations and full, pain: With the break of dawn and the rising of the day, On both sides arrows flew, men fell. But at the very hour that the woodcutter goes home to fix his meal In the mountain valleys when his arms have had enough Of hacking great trees, And the desire for sweet food seizes his entrails, At that hour, by their valor, the Danaans broke the rises in his heart, and disgust front. is not war, whatever Whatever Iliad wraps in poetry; veils the step from life to death: the realities war destroys of war, never. the No reticence or threatens, 31 Then his teeth flew out; from two sides, Blood came to his eyes; the blood that from lips and nostrils He was spilling, in its black cloud. open-mouthed; death enveloped him of the deeds of war is left undisguised; or hated. lot of fate and the gods decide the changing are admired, scorned, authority nor vanquished Within the limits fixed The cold brutality neither victors Almost always, battle. sovereign provoke ever blocking peace; motives, caprice and malice. vanquished, things regret can inspire that men are capable those comparison neither those fits of madness, war is their true business; As for the warriors, or s which liken them to beasts or but only nor contempt, their only victors admiration of being so transformed. by fate, the gods determine with victory and defeat. It is always they who which are for­ those treacheries, THERE may be, unknown to us, other expres­ sense of equity which breathes One is it has not been imitated. The aware that the poet is a Greek and not a Trojan. of its clue to the origin a direct portions; the Iliad; certainly sions of the extraordinary through barely tone of the poem furnishes oldest perhaps history more. If one believes the fall of Troy, the Achaeans one may ask whether iron, are not the songs of a conquered went into exile. Obliged homeland," their cities like the Trojans, these songs, to of whom a few to live and die, "very far from the like the Greeks who fell before Troy, people, in their turn were conquered, with their rare references they saw their own image both in will never be able to tell us with Thucydides having lost after that eighty years 32 and in the con­ whose misery was like their own. They could still who had been their fathers, unglossed by pride or shame. They could look at it as the conquerors, quered, see the Trojan war over that brief span of years in its true light, conquered what neither were blinded. distant simultaneously, ever saw, for both one can see such nor conquered this is mere fancy; conqueror Of course, and as conquerors times only in fancy's light. and so perceive IN any case, this poem is a miracle. bitterness, to force, for it springs from the sub­ that is, in the last Its bitterness This subjection of the human spirit to matter. is the only justifiable jections analysis, though each spirit own virtue. earth is. No one who succumbs regarded human relations, escapes loved sorrowfully over him. constantly hangs because will bear it differently, No one in the Iliad is spared by it, as no one on in proportion to its to it is by virtue of this fact with contempt. Whoever, within of force is loved but of destruction the dominion of the threat his own soul and in that is the common lot, al­ Such is the spirit of the only true epic the Occident The Odyssey seems merely a good imitation, pos­ now of sesses. the Iliad, now of Oriental poems; which, however brilliant, is disfigured and bad taste. The chansons equity, the death of an enemy does not come home to either in the same way as does the death of Roland. or reader de geste, lacking could not attain greatness: in the Chanson de Roland, by frigidity, the sense of author bombast, the Aeneid is an imitation Attic tragedy, Sophocles, tion of justice or at any rate the tragedy is the true continuation of Aeschylus of the epic. The concep­ ever directly it, without enlightens and intervening 33 not before always itself reveals by effects and human. The accounts and justice nor enveloped spirit, suffering incarnate, and death, show that a divine trembles but is laid bare, and we see is offered for our admiration. of the Greek genius, in its coldness from whose fatality by misfortune are the last marvelous given mankind to seek above all other Father," of our Heavenly and hardness, neither those who use here the shame of the in facile pity, and bruised The in it; here force appears attended it nor those who suffer it can escape; disguised, coerced is neither spirit here more than one spirit nor held up to scorn; degraded Gospels expression as the Iliad is the first: here the Greek spirit only in the injunction goods, "the kingdom also in the fact that human suffering it in a being who is at once divine of the Passion by misfortune, in the depths of its agony, to be cut off from man and God. that accent of The sense of human misery gives the Gospels and that en­ simplicity dows Greek tragedy phrases the Trojan lad dispatched to go, who comes to mind when Christ shall gird thee and carry thee whither accent cannot be separated from Gospels, justice ing fortune spirit, himself The variety illusion of several Only he who has measured how not to respect not." This the of shift­ to what extent pressing species the dominion Certain have a ring strangely reminiscent says to Peter: "Another thou wouldst nor love as he loves from him by an abyss. cannot regard as fellow-creatures and love. He who does not realize those whom chance separated and the Iliad with all their value. to Hades, though he does not wish the idea that inspired that is the mark of the of love and justice. of constraints and necessity subjection Greek genius, of the epic, and it is it, is capable distinct every human hold in of force, and knows is changed feels itself, upon man give rise to the that cannot communicate. for the sense of human misery is a pre-condition 34 grace-this whole temptations or to ignorance. por­ is so rare as to see misfortune fairly to treat the unfortunate person is either THE relations to which each soul creates between destiny and the human soul, the ques­ of virtue to falsehood, by shame, by hatred, the exercise is fraught by pride, by the will to oblivion and through with temptations enhanced its own destiny, in the soul are transformed the soul to fit the requirements by merciless of shifting can on the other hand be preserved, the extent tion of what elements necessity as it tailors fate, and of what elements through question that are positively indifference, contempt, nothing Moreover, trayed; the tendency as though catastrophe the effects of misfortune the soul can suffer and remain unmarked fact, to be recast generally speaking, with spiritual to avoid self-deception. The rewards discovered how to achieve purity, and simplicity. the Iliad to the Gospels jumped the borders destroyed, them force that allowed they of this were great; in all their acts the greatest by way of the tragic of Greek civilization; or to ignore that is, that fail, in on the soul, to assume, in misfortune's image. The Greeks, were his natural But the spirit were endowed vocation, of this spirit once Greece was by it, can remained nothing lucidity, but pale reflections. themselves believed to Both the Romans and the Hebrews them and they retained be exempt from the misery that is the common human lot. The Romans saw their country as the nation chosen by destiny of the world; to be mistress it was Hebrews, with the their God who exalted their superior position enemies, conquered of contempt to the Romans; and the Romans had no epics, no tragedies. In Rome gladiatorial fights took the place of tragedy. With misfortune the Hebrews, was a sure indication of contempt; hence a legitimate object just as long as they obeyed Him. Strangers, slaves, of sin and to them a vanquished were objects subjects, peoples, 35 that was transmitted from poets never to ex­ and condemned is a view that makes cruelty And no text of the Old to the note heard in the parts of the book of Job. and indeed indispensable. a note comparable to God himself enemy was abhorrent piate all sorts of crimes-this permissible Testament strikes Greek epic, unless Throughout the Hebrews and word; their masterpieces quotation justify. twenty centuries have been admired, it be certain of Christianity, read, imitated, the Romans both in deed and every time anybody had a crime he wanted to have yielded an appropriate should joyfully of the Gospels Those who believe Furthermore, that God himself, have understood who seem superior a long tremor of anguish, though grace could do more for a human being and death a sign of grace in the Christian was not handed generation to the was from the the spirit down in a pure state from one Christian suffering next. To undergo very beginning considered martyrs-as than it could for Christ. once he became man, could not face the harshness without the only people who can give the impression a higher plane, to ordinary to the aids of illusion, are the people who resort fanaticism, from their own of destiny the harshness eyes. The man who does not wear the armor of the lie cannot by it to the very soul. experience him, but it can­ Grace can prevent it too well, Chris­ not spare him the wound. Having forgotten tian tradition that that simplicity can only rarely renders every sentence On the other hand, the practice threw a veil over the effects used it. in the story of the Passion. of forcible of force on the souls of those who of destiny that risen to this touch from corrupting human misery, being touched force without so poignant to conceal of having recover In spite of the brief intoxication induced Renaissance been, during the course by the discovery of Greek literature, of twenty centuries, at the time of the there has of the no revival 3 6 exaltation, proselytization century strange in Shakes­ Moliere, Something view from that of the ep•c of it was seen in Villon, and-just are exposed once-in Racine. The in L'Ecole des Femmes which took the opposite and would only acknowledge of love, while it insisted of force in war and in politics. Greek genius. peare, Cervantes, bones of human suffering and in Phedre, love being the context-a indeed, period, context effects To the list of writers given above, a few other names might be added. But nothing the peoples poem that appeared cover the epic genius, from fate, learn not to admire force, nor to scorn the unfortunate. another when they learn that there is no refuge not to hate the enemy, of Europe have produced How soon this will happen is among them. Perhaps is worth the first known in the human suffering they will yet redis­ on swathing question. with glory the 37 A Note on Simone Weil SIMONE WElL died in England in August 1 943 at the age of 34. Simone Weil was distinguished among her classmates by a products as her everyday She assimilated in which the moral and the intellectual were inex­ mental fare When she was gradu­ and Greek her culture, personality united. tricably the highest of art and science. ated and began to teach philosophy, language and literature, going always to the great primary Homeric tecture it was her personal relations . .. . But even more than her encyclopedic sense of human honesty that won the admiration mathematics to broaden sources, Vitruvius' and her delicate she continued geometry, Euclidian rules of archi­ poetry, whether knowledge, it was of her pupils. led her to communism, when she was Her temperament herself with the poor and rather with workers than In theory as well as in daily she came to know Communism, outgrowing it through She lived in Germany with the Wandervogel experience and through her own intellectual during militants. she preferred uniting about 20. Instinctively suffering, to associate with the political practice rapidly efforts. her vacations Civil War drew her to Spain, to share the trials Fascinated psychology gave up teaching of her comrades from the University, in misery and battle. by the problem of the effect on the worker's of modern technology and mechanization, she for two years in order to work in the Renault and the first shots of the to seek out the humblest tasks, 38 works and other Parisian workers. factories and to live among the life were years of torment: could cure, which no doctor suffering The ten years of her militant from headaches at the thought physical and moral suffering by the totalitarian and of the hideous regimes of total warfare. She bore it with a stoic serenity by an ardent religious to Christianity. modern problems assuming which brought Simone Weil approached with the missionary's might serve as a model. pedagogy feeling of the cruelties her ever closer inflicted foreshadowings sustained the most distressing her un­ calm courage; During the war, after she was dismissed from her university to go laws imposed for She soon sailed about organization, to get she by the Germans, in 1 942-re­ with death in her soul. She was determined in the struggle. of the racist her family to the United States post because accompanied luctantly, back again to take part the Gaullist she entered England, where which she had no illusions-with back into France by any means. But the trip in the dead of wartime winter, under undermined already health, the efforts finally, French themselves were then getting caused her death in a few weeks and consummated sacrifices. and, the she would not eat more than the meagre rations for her was disastrous way of life; her illness; by her quasi-ascetic aggravated the determination she made to be useful conditions, in France. her futile Tuberculosis (The above has been adapted with the Politics printed from the article of "The Iliad." ) edition by CANDIDE and 39